The next several
lessons are going
to round out our discussion
of Java parallel streams
internals, starting by
focusing on non-concurrent and
concurrent collectors.
Naturally, this is still
part of the combined
phase of the Java parallel
streams phase pipeline.
In this part of
the lesson, we'll
recognize key behaviors
and differences
between non-concurrent
and concurrent collectors.
If you recall our discussions
from previous weeks,
collector is an interface
whose implementations
can accumulate input elements
into a mutable result
container.
Collector implementations
can either
be defined as concurrent
or as non-concurrent
based on their characteristics.
These are characteristics
that are returned
from the characteristics
factory method
and basically represent
metadata about the collector.
For example, is it ordered, is
it unordered, is it concurrent,
is it non-concurrent, does
it have identity finish,
and so on.
And these are the
different flags
that can be set to control the
semantics of the collector.
The distinction between
concurrent and non-concurrent
collectors are really only
relevant for parallel streams.
With a sequential stream,
of course, it doesn't really
matter because there's
only one thread,
so whether something is going to
be concurrent or non-concurrent
is really sort of a
no-op, but of course, you
should stick with using non
concurrent collectors for four
sequential streams,
because otherwise you're
adding unnecessary overhead.
For parallel streams,
however, things are different,
and we're going to be
focusing exclusively
on parallel streams
in this lesson.
For parallel streams, a
non-concurrent collector
allows you to work with
the parallel stream
in a different way than
a concurrent collector.
Of course, a
non-concurrent collector
can be used for either
a sequential stream
or a parallel stream.
So it's much like the
shimmer non-dairy floor
wax that's either a dessert
topping or a floor wax.
Let's start by
giving an overview
of the structure
and functionality
of non-concurrent collectors.
A non-concurrent collector
operates by merging sub-results
together.
Let's kind of review the
phases involved here.
In the split phase, the input
is partitioned into chunks
using parallel spliterators,
same as always.
In the apply phase,
each of these chunks
can run in parallel in
the common ForkJoinPool.
Again, nothing different
from what we've done before.
With the combined
phase, however,
for a non-concurrent
collector, the sub-results
that are emanating from
the common ForkJoinPool
when they process the chunks
are collected together
into an intermediate, mutable
result container, which
could typically be something
like a link list or an array
list or a hash setter or tree
set or a hash map and so on.
And so these different
mutable result containers
are each going to reside
in a different thread,
one thread for everything
that's running,
and one of the ForkJoin worker
threads in the ForkJoin worker
thread pool.
And each of these
different threads
will always operate
on different instances
of intermediate
result containers.
The sub-results are
merged successively,
as we kind of pull ourselves
out of the recursion,
if you will, into a single,
final reduced result container,
which is the result
of the whole reduction
of the parallel stream.
Only one thread in
the ForkJoinPool
is used to merge
together any pair
of intermediate sub-results
from an intermediate result
container.
And so as a
consequence, you never
have to worry about
putting locks in the code
here for non-concurrent
collectors,
because the merging is only ever
done in one thread at a time.
So there's no need for
any synchronization,
which simplifies your
life considerably.
Also, it allows you to use
very basic collections,
like array lists, which don't
have synchronized operations.
So to kind of take a step back
and evaluate the pros and cons
of this, using non-concurrent
collectors for parallel streams
is thread safe.
It's also order preserving.
It preserves in counter
order, but for certain types
of containers,
like maps and sets,
it can be costly, because
it is fairly expensive
to merge sets or merge maps
together multiple times
as we're moving up to the final
reduction in the final merge.
In contrast, if
you're going to merge
an array list, or a
linked list, those
are very simple operations.
But merging maps and sets
takes longer amounts of time.
To address those limitations
with non-concurrent collectors,
there's also the concept
of concurrent collectors
in Java parallel streams.
So what we're going to do
now is turn our attention
to analyzing their
structure and functionality.
A concurrent collector creates
one concurrent mutable result
container and then
accumulates elements into it
from multiple threads
in a parallel stream,
so there's only one
of these containers,
and it needs to be thread-safe.
It needs to be a concurrent--
a concurrent
collection actually.
It's a very common thing to use.
Let's walk through
the steps again just
to show how it
compares and contrasts
with the use of
non-concurrent collectors.
So as usual in the
splitting phase,
the input is
partitioned into chunks
using parallel spliterators.
In the apply phase, each
chunk runs in parallel
on the common ForkJoinPool.
Both those phases are
identical for concurrent and
non-concurrent collectors.
Where things get interesting
is in the combine phase.
In this model, the
sub-results from the chunks
that are processed
in the ForkJoinPool
are collected into a single
mutable result container,
typically a
concurrent collection,
like a concurrent hash map or
perhaps a concurrent hash set,
which we'll talk
about here shortly.
Different threads in
the parallel stream,
actually more specifically
in the common ForkJoinPool
share this one concurrent
result container.
And as a consequence,
there's no need
to merge any
intermediate sub-results.
However, this comes at a price.
One thing that happens is an
encounter order, of course,
is not preserved, because
we're just merging everything
into one container, so the
encounter order is ignored.
And synchronization
will be required.
Now, that's usually
not a big deal,
because you'll
typically simply use
a concurrent collection, like a
concurrent hash map and so on.
But it is something you
have to be aware of.
If you try to use something
very simple, like an array list,
for a concurrent collector,
chaos and insanity
will break out because array
list is not thread safe,
and so you'll end up with erase
conditions and corrupted values
in your list.
So when is a concurrent
collector a win?
A concurrent collector
could be a win
if the synchronization costs
for the concurrent collector
are lower than the merging costs
for a non-concurrent collector.
So put another way, the
concurrent collector
may outperform the
non-concurrent collector
if the merging costs are
higher for the non-concurrent
collector than the
synchronization costs are
for the concurrent collector.
Now, we're actually
going to take a look
and see how this all
plays out here later.
But for right now, let's
kind of compare and contrast
a couple of concrete examples
of result containers, which
are basically different
Java collections.
So it turns out that highly
optimized result containers,
like the concurrent
hash map collection,
may actually be more
efficient than trying
to merge non-synchronized
containers, like hash maps.
The reason for
that, of course, is
the concurrent hash map
is very cleverly designed
to have multiple
segment locks that
protect different groups of
buckets in the hash table,
and as long as values
that are being added to
or read from the
concurrent hash map
end up hashing to different
buckets that are controlled
or protected by
different segment locks,
there will be no
contention, and there'll
be no single point of overhead
in the concurrent hash map,
so that it's very
efficient in many cases.
Conversely, merging
two hash maps together
takes a fair amount of time.
It's also worth noting,
just as an aside,
that if you use a
concurrent collection for--
or if you use a
thread safe collection
for a concurrent collector, make
sure you stick with something
like concurrent hash
map, which is optimized
for concurrent access, rather
than use the more old school
synchronized map.
Synchronized map
was added as kind
of a stopgap in early
versions of Java
before they had the cool
concurrent hash map solution,
and it basically just
has a single synchronizer
that protects all the
various entries in the map.
So as a result when multiple
operations are trying
to get items into the
map, that single lock
will become a point
of contention,
whereas the
concurrent hash map is
unlikely to have those
single points of contention.
So probably much
better in practice
to use concurrent hash maps
for these kinds of uses.